Just your overview and then leave a little
time for questions if you wish to.
Thank you. Um, my name's Lois Gilmore.
I'm a lawyer at Public Trust.
This is David McClay, uh, barrister.
He's been guiding us through the process.
Um, we have some slides that we just wanna speak to first
of all, and then we will take some questions that we have.
Thank you. Um, so, uh, we know
that, uh, at the introduction there was a lot of talk about,
um, Charles and, um, we will seem to nail, um, you know,
what, what he was about and his legacy.
Um, we, uh, are here
to introduce this, uh, to talk about the private bill that,
uh, we are seeking to amend the Carter Trust Act that was,
uh, created in 1961.
Uh, the reason this bill is needed is
because there is already a bill that amended the will
of Mr. Carter.
Um, and so in order to achieve the objectives,
the s is sort
Yeah. Where do, where do
you want the, um, us
to go with these slides?
Yeah. Um, we found a picture of, um,
Charles Brooke and Carter, um, uh, which
isn't copyrighted, um,
but, uh, uh, I think actually, uh, the words expressed
by various members of the house, uh,
gave a much better picture of, uh, a man than, uh,
a very old photo.
Um, if we go to the next slide, please.
Um, as Lois has said, um,
private bill is required to, uh, to change the will.
Um, I would note that, um,
section 42 G of the Charities Act
as amended in 2023, which interestingly was a bill that went
through this committee,
but I don't think almost none of you were here at that time.
One, um, I'll hold you responsible. Sorry. Oh, thank you.
Um, minority participant, yes.
Yes, quite, um, it requires reviews of governance
and, uh, I'll digress.
This is a little hobby horse for 10 seconds.
There's about a hun.
There's well over a hundred private bills relating
to charities, and I don't think, uh,
that was appreciated at the time that the,
this amendment went through.
So I, I'll, I'll, um, make no further comment than that.
Um, the main point is that it's no longer appropriate, um,
to continue the trust fund being held
in public trust, when in fact it can be simplified and that,
and that's an efficiency gain.
Um, there's a preference in the submission from
the Anglican Church about how the amount was calculated.
They say actuarily based, um, the public trust exceeded
to the amount, uh,
but more especially the Carter
Society exceeded to that amount.
So, um, it's basically putting aside, uh, something that is
for the purposes of the church.
Um, and mainly the majority
of the funds will end up in the Carter Society,
which is a charitable society running a very, uh,
well run, uh, retirement home as,
as I can understand it from, uh, rest home.
So that will continue the charitable purposes
and objectives of the late Mr. Carter,
we can just move to the next slide, please.
Um, a number of the provisions
of the 1961 Act are now spent.
Um, they're irrelevant, no land is currently owned, uh,
in the trust or, um,
so the bill will repeal those provisions, um,
which clarify that.
Um, I, I don't think I need to take you through
that exactly, uh, in any detail.
Um, although I would note that, uh, clauses seven
and eight have a deferred enactment.
Uh, they come into force six months after enactment, um,
and then clause nine, um, which the,
the, the then Minister of Health,
but I believe the Ministry of Health has no problems with,
has agreed to, uh, the repeal
of this rather anachronistic provision that said, the rules
of the Carter Society need the
Minister of Health's approval.
Um, pretty, uh,
it probably made sense in 1961, uh,
but today, uh, no.
Um, and then if I can, just at the risk
of sounding like a debater and I, that's not what I do.
Um, if we can go to the next slide.
There have been, oh, sorry. I'm one, uh, yeah, sorry.
Um, there's one more provision here
that I wanted to mention.
Um, uh, without the amendment of the objects by Parliament,
um, the existing structure would continue add infinitum.
Um, and as I've said,
there's an efficiency gain,
which particularly the Carter Society is, uh, interested in.
We've provided some hand rails, uh, that's my term.
I was an orienter 40 odd years ago, 45 years ago, um,
when I was fit and young.
Um, that will ensure that after enactment, um,
and unfortunately the date of enactment can't be protected.
So, uh, we can't suddenly say this will all happen on the
31st of March or whatever.
Um, parliamentary timetables
and stuff, uh, sometimes get in the way of that.
Um, but there'll be an orderly winding up, which is,
is largely just transferring the funds to the two entities,
but making sure there's a final, um, set of accounts.
Uh, and that will be done.
So there's a six month period,
and then I sayed into the next slide the wrong way.
Um, I don't want to sound like I'm debating,
but there are some misunderstandings by some submitters, um,
who don't, uh, we don't understand
where they're coming from.
We don't know their connections, uh,
but they have a right to make submissions,
so I'm not criticizing that.
Um, but I do note that the concept of SPR
or charitable scheme under the Charitable Trust Act, um,
is not available where the relevant provisions
of a charitable trust have been amended by a bill, uh,
sorry, been amended by an act, private act as this one has.
So there's misunderstanding in some of those submissions.
Um, uh, technically speaking,
although the, um, DIA charity services may appear
to be the regulator for some purposes of charities,
it's not the relevant regulatory body for the purposes
of general, uh, administration of the Charitable Trust Act.
Um, so it's actually the Attorney General.
Um, and then in terms of the exclusion of liability point
that one of the submitters made, um, what is proposed here
is to make the trusts consistent with what the Trust Act
enacted in 2019.
Um, exclusion for dishonesty, willful misconduct,
gross negligence, which actually
displaces the language of the will, which is a,
a broader exclusion.
So I, I, I raise those points, not way, uh, not necessarily
as debating points, uh, uh,
because someone has made submissions,
but I do think it's, they're relevant points
for the committee to understand.
So, um, in the best traditions of trying to, uh,
not waste time, uh, we, we, we'd love to answer questions.
Mr. Chair. Thank you very much. Uh, very helpful. Um, Warren
Had a, had a couple of questions. I
just had a couple that, um,
we've held over from Ministry of Justice.
Um, the bill, as it sits as silent on the requirement
to upkeep Mr. Carter is great.
Is that an oversight or deliberate omission?
Um, the,
I think there was an omission in 1961.
Okay. Uh, do, do you think it's appropriate to
amend the bill to include that, uh,
and whose responsibility would it be if we did that?
I think it's a ca Um, I, I think, um, if,
and I'm not aware, wrap resident, um, appreciate a member
for why a wrap just arriving.
Um, the, uh, the Carter Society,
I think honors Mr. Carter.
Um, and I think the up upkeep of the grave, um, is likely
to be dealt with there.
I think that's actually how the 1961 act operated as well.
Um, uh, but we, uh, we,
we haven't thought about that.
Uh, and it wasn't, uh, given that the bill was drafted with
input from, uh, the Carter Society.
Um, if there is a, a need for a change there,
we can deal with that.
But I think the best, uh, implication is that Mr.
Uh, Carter's grave, um, will be up.
Uh, the Carter Society continued on him in the same way,
but there's actually now a statue of Mr. Carter
prominently in, um, Carter.
Uh, it's just, um,
and it's all very, well, you know, we say that now in 2025,
um, in 2050, um, will be a different community and,
and, um, you know, that was obviously part
of his initial wishes and,
and his, um, you know, and his will.
And, um, I, I'd like
to pay homage to the initial will
because that is where his, his, you know, everything
that he wanted was specified.
So if you're not,
if you don't think there would be any complication
by including that in there, if they're doing it anyway,
it shouldn't be a problem, should it?
I can't speak on behalf of the society who,
for reasons I don't completely understand,
aren't, aren't making a novel.
Okay. Um, it might be that a letter, uh,
from the committee needs to, if, if the point is, uh,
important one, I, I'm not aware of whether ministry,
you made an, a brief remark about the Ministry
of Justice noting this.
We haven't seen, I haven't really seen
any material from them. So we
Just said after this, Sorry, we
Only, we only mentioned it
to them 10 minutes ago, so it's okay.
You wouldn't have seen anything. Yeah.
Um, the other question we had, wa
or I had was around, um, the distribution
to the Anglican Parish Council, there's a one off
of $50,000.
Is that in lieu of the annual Yes. Distributions? Yes.
So that's a one-off and all
of the other annual distributions will cease?
Correct. Okay.
So dis that,
that provision is enshrined in the 1961 Act.
Right. Um, and in fact,
they're just basically drawing a line through that
and creating the distribution to the Carter Society subject
to the 50,000 going out first.
Okay. Um, the other question is around, um, the land.
So I think it was 13, 13 titles have been disposed of,
uh, in, uh, some in 2000 with the court order.
I guess we, yeah, yeah. Yeah.
So, so is that the, is that all of it?
There's no original assets sitting.
It is cash, sorry. It's, it is cash and investments.
Right. And a loan, actually a loan from the trust
to the society, which effectively will get wiped
out on distribution.
Right. Yeah. Um, so
There's nothing else held in, in,
You know, nothing.
Um, and interestingly, just, um, in terms of our need
to comply with standing orders, we treat,
although we could have, um, argued
that there were, were no assets and therefore no land and
therefore no, um, newspaper advertisements, we took the
line of, uh, that we would actually advertise, uh,
even though there is no land.
Okay. Okay.
Mike, did you have any
questions, comments you wanted to add?
Great. Look. Um, look, thank you.
Um, MA's covered, covered the questions I had as well.
Uh, so, uh, I think with, with that,
we'll include the public session, um, and, uh,
and we'll consideration just steps
unless there's anything else you wanted to add.
Just one point, um, the letter
that I sent in on the 3rd of October, asking that I can,
um, as is moderately usual practice with private bills,
if someone from the promoter and it's me, um,
and I've done it twice before, um, can be allowed access
on a confidential basis and,
and attend committee meetings as required.
Um, I don't know whether
that's being put to the committee or not. Sure.
No, we, we have discussed that. Yep.
And that's approved as it,
We, we also, we'll go to private now and,
and we'll, it's a, it's a, it's a,
it's a metaphor for discussion.
It's a process. Process question.
Okay. Very good.